---
title: Why I Started Using Jekyll
layout: post
thumbnail: /images/posts/2013-11-03-website.png
tags: software-tools
---

After creating an initial version of this website over the last few weeks, I decided to expand and include a blog. Generally, this means using a dynamic site approach with a database and server-side code, but a static implementation was appealing to me for several reasons. Blog aside, with a larger site, managing all the page content was quickly becoming a bit of a nightmare. By chance, I stumbled on a fantastic tool called [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/), which its developers describe as a, "blog-aware, static site generator in Ruby."

Jekyll is a static HTML generator, which basically means that rather than spelling out every last line of code in your static HTML pages, that you can add tags [(liquid tags)](http://liquidmarkup.org/) into your HTML that include from other sources. Once everything is ready to go and you run Jekyll on your website directory, it will actually replace all the tags with HTML, yielding fully functional HTML files. For example, if all your HTML pages have a common header and footer (like mine do), you can add tags to link to the header and footer HTML rather than copy them into every single file. This makes modifications a breeze and lets you focus on the unique content of each page.

As all of that is a bit abstract, I'll go though a simple example. Jekyll allows you to specify any number of layouts defining how content is displayed on a given page. Most of the pages on this website use a common layout, which is simply:

    {% raw %}
    {% include header.html %}
    {{content}}
    {% include footer.html %}
    {% endraw %}

The header and footer are simply HTML files are where I have placed all the code above and below the main page content (essentially, everything outside the body). Pages using this layout can now be written as:

    {% raw %}
    ---
    title: mypage
    layout: default
    ---
    My unique page content.
    {% endraw %}

The lines of code between the ---'s (front-matter) basically tell Jekyll which layout to use on the given HTML file. Jekyll ultimately inserts the code below the second --- in place of {% raw%}{{ contents }}{% endraw %} in the layout document (along with the header and footer code in my case), and end up in the final HTML file. On the page you are on now (as of this posting), I also include a side-bar on the right. This involves a moderately more complex layout:

    {% raw %}
    <div class="partition group">	
        <div class=""col span_2_of_3">	
            {{ content }}
        </div>

        <div class="col span_1_of_3">
            {% include sidebar.html %}
        </div>
    </div>
    {% endraw %}

Here, I have included classes that (with the help of some CSS) break the page into a grid. The page content goes in the left two-thirds of the screen, and the side-bar goes in the right third. Note that the HTML for the side-bar is included from a separate file. This allows it to be reused on other pages with a single liquid tag in the layout, a feature I find to be quite handy for including elements that appear unchanged on multiple pages. I have found this makes defining new pages and components much much easier and eliminates a huge amount of redundancy.


Another powerful aspect of Jekyll is the fact that it can facilitate a blog (like this one) without any database or server-side code. Jekyll allows you to define markdown or HTML files containing your posts and any amount of custom information about them such as a reference to a banner photo or whatever else you feel like adding. Jekyll can automatically generate permalinks for individual blog posts, break your blog into multiple pages, and do all kinds of nifty things. Jekyll also makes it easy to loop through any number of the most recent posts to display on a homepage along with excerpts, images, whatever.

Jekyll has been extremely useful for me and I hope you will check it out! There is a slight learning curve, but it is well worth a little investment. The developers have extensive documentation on their [website](http://jekyllrb.com/) and fellow Husky [Andrew Munsell's online tutorial](http://www.andrewmunsell.com/tutorials/jekyll-by-example/) was very helpful in getting started. Best of luck!

